---
layout: post
title: "Diffusion of Responsibility"
date: 2014-08-14 14:00:00 -0600
comments: true
categories: [Mozilla]
---
Something that I've been noticing on numerous social media and discussion forum 
sites is that whenever Firefox comes up, inevitably there are comments in those 
threads about Firefox performance. Given my role at Mozilla, these comments are 
of particular interest to me.

The reaction to roc's [recent blog post](http://robert.ocallahan.org/2014/08/choose-firefox-now-or-later-you-wont.html) 
has motivated me enough to respond to a specific subset of comments. These 
comments all exhibit a certain pattern: their authors are experiencing problems 
with Firefox, they are very dissatisfied, but they are not discussing them in a 
way that is actionable by Mozilla.

How Mozilla Finds Problems
--------------------------

Mozilla encourages our contributors to run prerelease versions of Firefox, 
especially [Nightly](http://nightly.mozilla.org) builds. This allows us to do 
some good old-fashioned dogfooding during the development of a Firefox release. 

We also have many tools that run as part of our continuous integration 
infrastructure. Valgrind, Address Sanitizer, Leak Sanitizer, reference count 
tracking, deadlock detection, assertions, Talos performance tests, and xperf are 
some of the various tools that we apply to our builds. I do not claim that this 
list is exhaustive! :-)

We use numerous technologies to discover problems that occur while running on 
our users' computers. We have a crash reporter that (with the user's consent) 
reports [data](https://crash-stats.mozilla.com/home/products/Firefox) about the 
crash. We have Firefox Health Report and [Telemetry](http://telemetry.mozilla.org) 
that, when consented to, send us useful information for discovering problems.

Our ability to analyze crash report/FHR/telemetry data is limited to those users 
who consent to share it with us. As much as I am proud of the fact that we 
respect the privacy of our users, this means that we only receive data from a 
fraction of them; many users who are experiencing problems are not included in 
this data.

Despite the fact that we have all of these wonderful tools to help us deliver 
quality releases, the fact is that they cannot exhaustively catch every possible 
bug that is encountered out in the wild. There are too many combinations of 
extensions and configurations out there to possibly allow us to catch 
everything before release.

That's where you, our users, come in!

If You See Something, Report It!
--------------------------------

Reddit, Hacker News, Slashdot and other similar sites are fantastic for ranting. 
I should know -- I do it with the best of them! Having said that, they are also 
terrible for the purposes of bug reporting!

As users it's easy for us to assume that somebody else will encounter our 
problems and report them. Unfortunately that is not always the case, especially 
with a browser that is as configurable as Firefox.

### Reporting Bugs

If you are experiencing a bug, the best way to ensure that something can be done 
about your bug is to [report it](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/enter_bug.cgi?format=guided) 
in Bugzilla. This might seem a little bit intimidating for somebody who is new 
to bug reporting, but I assure you, Mozillians are really nice! As long as you 
follow the [etiquette guidelines](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/page.cgi?id=etiquette.html), 
you'll be fine! One suggestion though: try to follow our 
[bug writing guidelines](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/QA/Bug_writing_guidelines). 
Doing so will maximize the likelihood of a contributor being able to reproduce 
your problem. In addition to these suggestions for bug filing, I also suggest 
including certain types of data for specific types of problems:

### Reporting a Bug for High Memory Usage

If you're experiencing problems with Firefox's memory use, open a tab, and 
point your browser to `about:memory`. This nifty feature provides a breakdown 
of Firefox memory consumption. Save that report and attach it to the bug that 
you've filed.

### Reporting a Bug for Slowness

If you want report a problem with Firefox being slow, the best way to help us is 
is to include data that has been generated by the [Gecko Profiler](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Performance/Profiling_with_the_Built-in_Profiler).
Unfortunately this is tool requires a bit of technical savvy, but attaching the 
URL of an uploaded profile to your performance bug can be very helpful.

### Reporting a Bug for a Persistent, Reproducable Crash

As you can see in our [crash report data](https://crash-stats.mozilla.com/home/products/Firefox),
crashes reported to Mozilla are ranked by frequency. As you might expect, this 
implies that it's often the squeaky wheels that get the grease.

If you have an easily reproducable crash and you are sending your reports to 
Mozilla, you can help us by pointing Firefox to `about:crashes`. This page lists 
all of the crash reports that have been generated on your computer. If the crash 
that you are experiencing isn't on our list of top crashers, you can still help 
us to fix it: filing a bug that includes multiple crash report URLs from your 
`about:crashes` screen will help tremendously.

In Conclusion
-------------

If there is one idea that you can take away from this post (a TL;DR, if you will),
it is this: *Mozilla cannot fix 100% of the bugs that we do not know about.*

Taking an active role in the Mozilla community by reporting your issues through 
the proper channels is the best way to ensure that your problems can be fixed.

**EDIT:** To be clear: What I am suggesting is that users who are enthusiastic 
enough to post a comment to Hacker News (for example) should also be savvy 
enough to be able to file a proper bug report. Please do not misconstrue this 
post as a demand that novice users start filing bugs.

**EDIT August 15, 2014:** Nick Nethercote just [blogged](https://blog.mozilla.org/nnethercote/2014/08/15/the-story-of-a-tricky-bug/) 
about a tricky memory bug that couldn't have been diagnosed without the help of 
a Redditor whose complaint we steered to Bugzilla.

